---
categories: Haskell
title: Some notes in Haskell
---

# Lazy Evaluation

### Why does `a ++ (b ++ c)` faster than `a ++ (b ++ c)`?

`++` traverses the left parameter and append each item of it to the right parameter which leads to a worse performance when using the wrong association. 

In short, the bad association gives a quadratic amount of traversal as it redoes all the traversals it has already done, plus one more, at each invocation of `(++)`, while the good association traverses each list at most once. 

# Functor

### What's the definition of Functor?

*Functor* is a type class, the definition of Functor is:

```haskell
class Functor f where 
	fmap :: (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
```

**Each Functor *f* is a type (type constructor) with exactly one type slot**. 

The operator that Functor *f* support is `fmap`.

### `Instance Functor Maybe` or `Instance Functor (Maybe m)`?

*Functor* is a special *type class*, for we define Functor type class as:

```haskell
class Functor f where 
	fmap :: (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
```

In classical *type classes*, which is defined such as following:

```haskell
class Eq a where 
	(==) :: a -> a -> Bool 
	(/=) :: a -> a -> Bool 
	x == y = not (x /= y) 
	x /= y = not (x == y)
```

there *a* denotes a *type variable* which can be think as `Int`, `Double`, `Char` and so on. When we implement this type class, we use `instance` clause such as following:

```haskell
instance Eq TrafficLight where 
	Red == Red = True 
	Green == Green = True 
	Yellow == Yellow = True 
	_ == _ = False
```

where `TrafficLight` is a *concrete type*, 

Think of that a functor is also a type class, when we implement functor type class, we use following statements:

```haskell
instance Functor Maybe where 
	fmap f (Just x) = Just (f x) 
	fmap f Nothing = Nothing
```

**Question 1**: When we implement the `Eq` type class, we use a concrete type `TrafficLight`; but when we implement the `Functor` type class, why we can use `Maybe` which is just a *type constructor* and not a type?

**Answer**: Just as an answer in Stack Overflow question [What is a functor in functional programming](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2030863/in-functional-programming-what-is-a-functor), we can just think `Maybe` as a more general type with some collective properties, it can take a type such as `Int` as its parameters and generate a new type `Maybe Int`, which is a concrete type not so general as type `Maybe` is.

So the right answer is `Instance Functor Maybe`.

### How to understand `Function as Functor` and `Function as Applicative`?

First, how to understand function as functor?

We can regard functor as an empty box such as:

```haskell
instance Functor Maybe where 
	fmap :: (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
	fmap f (Just x) = Just (f x) 
	fmap f Nothing = Nothing
```

there, `Maybe` type can be seen as an **empty box with one slot** which take a type to generate a concrete type `Maybe a`. In the `fmap` function:

- The first parameter is a function, which maps from a to b;
- **The second parameter is a value of the type with the slot filled(concrete type), this concrete type is generated by type constructor and has the type *f a* (*f* is `Maybe`, so *f a* is `Maybe a` ).**

When we implement function functors, for function functors must have two parameters to make a type `a -> b`, if we want our function functor has exactly one slot, we should first fill a slot, so the type constructor of function functor is ((->) r):

```haskell
instance Functor ((->) r) where 
	fmap f g = (\x -> f (g x))
```

As the same as the `fmap` function in `Maybe` Functor, we should regard the second parameter *g* as a value of a concrete type which is generate by *f* (*f* equals `(->) r`), so *f a* is `(->) r a` which can be seen as `r -> a`. Finally, it is not difficult to understand that the *g x* in the `fmap` function cannot be seen as `r -> x`,  it is just a function application which can be seen as `(r -> a) x`, also `(x -> a)`.

Finally, it is not hard to understand that the <\*> function in Applicative function `(->) r`  can be implemented as following:

```haskell
<*> :: f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
<*> :: (r -> a -> b) -> (r -> a) -> (r -> b)
<&> :: (a -> b) -> (r -> a) -> (r -> b)
f <*> g = \r -> f r (g r)
```

for *g r* will map *r* to *a*, *f r a* will map *r, a* to *b*, so the whole lambda function can be seen as `r -> b`,  also `f b`. For an instance:

```haskell
((+) <*> (+3)) 5
```

the result is 5 + (5 + 3) = 13.

# Applicative Functor

### What's the definition of Applicative Functor?

*Applicative Functor* is a type class, it is also a Functor, the definition of Applicative Functor is:

```haskell
class (Functor f) => Applicative f where 
	pure :: a -> f a 
	(<*>) :: f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
	(<$>) :: (Functor f) => (a -> b) -> f a -> f b 
```

**Each Applicative Functor *f* is a type (type constructor) with exactly one type slot**. 

The operator that Applicative Functor *f* support is `pure`, `<*>` and `<$> (Just another name for fmap)`.

### How to understand in functions as applicatives using applicative style: `(+) <$> (+3) <*> (*100) $ 5 ` = 508?

We know `(+)` has type: `Num a, a -> a -> a`;

We also know `(+3)` and `(*100)` has type: `Num r, a, r -> a`;

`(+) <$> (+3)` equals `pure (+) <*> (+3)`, where `:t pure (+)` equals `Num _, a, _ -> a -> a -> a`

In another words, the `pure (+)` simply takes a `_` parameter whatever and return the `+` operator, the parameter `_` has no effect on the final return value. `pure (+)` also maps the return value of function `(+3)` to a function. Now for

```haskell
f <*> g = \r -> f r (g r)
```

we can apply the operators and get:

```haskell
pure (+) <*> (+3) = 
	\r -> f r (gr) =
	\r -> + (gr) =
	\r -> + (r + 3) =
	\r x -> x + (r + 3)
```

it has the type `r -> x -> a`. We then calculate `pure (+) <*> (+3) <*> (*100)` using the definition of <*>, and get:

```haskell
pure (+) <*> (+3) <*> (*100) = 
	\r -> f r (gr) =
	\r -> (r + 3) + (gr)
	\r -> (r + 3) + (r * 100)
```

then we apply this function with parameter 5, we get:

```haskell
(5 + 3) + (5 * 100) = 508 
```

we can simply think this applicative style as first to calculate the value after `<$>` and sum them up with the operator before `<$>`. In last example, this operator is a binary operator equals `(+)`, we can replace it with a triple operator `(\x y z -> [x,y,z])`, so the following equation holds:

```haskell
(\x y z -> [x,y,z]) <$> (+3) <*> (*2) <*> (/2) $ 5 = [8.0,10.0,2.5]
```

# Monoid

### What's the definition of Monoid?

*Monoid* is a type class, **this type class is for types whose values can be combined together with a binary operation**. The definition of Monoid is:

```haskell
class Monoid m where 
	mempty :: m 
	mappend :: m -> m -> m 
	mconcat :: [m] -> m 
```

First, we see that only concrete types can be made instances of Monoid, because the m in the type class definition doesn’t take any type parameters. This is different from Functor and Applicative, which require their instances to be type constructors that take one parameter.

The operator that Monoid *m* support is `mempty`, `mappend` and `mconcat`.

# Monad

### What's the definition of Monad?

*Monad* is a type class, it is also an Applicative Functor, the definition of Monad is:

```haskell
class Monad m where 
	return :: a -> m a
	(>>=) :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
	(>>) :: m a -> m b -> m b 
	x >> y = x >>= \_ -> y
	fail :: String -> m a 
	fail msg = error msg
```

**Each Monad *m* is a type (type constructor) with exactly one type slot**. 

The operator that Monad *m* support is `return (Just another pure)`, `>>= (beefed-up <*>)`, `>>` and `fail`.

### How to understand the implementation of `State s` Monad

The implementation of Monad `State s` is:

```haskell
instance Monad (State s) where 
	return x = State $ \s -> (x, s) 
	(State h) >>= f = State $ \s -> let (a, newState) = h s 
										(State g) = f a
									in g newState
```

Well, the result of feeding a stateful computation to a function with `>>=` must be a stateful computation, right? So, we start of with the `State` newtype wrapper, and then we type out a lambda. This lambda will be our new stateful computation. function *h* has type `s -> (a, s)`,  and the result function has type `s -> (b, s)`. **The whole implementation of `>>=` do is passing a state to the function *h*, computing its new state and pass the new state to function *g* implied in *f*, getting the newer state.** So that's not strange that when we define following function:

```haskell
import Control.Monad.State
stackManip :: State Stack Int 
stackManip = do 
	push 3 
	a <- pop 
	pop
```

and we execute it with `runState stackManip [5,8,2,1]`. The first state is `[5,8,2,1]`, we pass the state to the `push 3` and a newer state `[3,5,8,2,1]` is generated when it turns to `a <- pop`, and so on.



